# Jake Gottschalk ePortfolio
## BS Computer Science


### Professional Self-Assessment

During my work in the Computer Science program at Southern New Hampshire University I was able to build a solid foundation for a career in the Computer Science industry. Prior to entering the program, I was interested in computers and information technology, but did not have any knowledge beyond that of a typical computer user. Computer Science piqued my interest because it was a way of using my logical thinking and problem-solving skills that I had developed in a previous career path. 
	
IT-145 Foundation in Application Development was the first course to lay the base for how application development should be approached. I learned about the processes to prepare for coding a project as well as the basic best practices for writing quality programs. IT-145 segued well into CS 250 Software Development Lifecycle and CS-260 Data Structures and Algorithms. Both of those classes provided crucial information for how to build a more complex and robust software project. Data structures particularly taught about building various classes and functions of software. Using the skills learned in the previously mentioned courses, CS-310 taught about how to collaborate with a team while developing software. Team collaboration is a necessary and sometimes underrated portion of the software development process. In this course we learned about various methods of project management styles as well as how progress is communicated in methods such a scrum meeting.

CS-340, DAD-220, and DAT-220 all developed skills related to database access and management. DAD-220 Intro to SQL covered the basics of database management using SQL to create, update, read, and delete databases and records. In CS-340 Client/Server Development, I learned about MongoDB query operations and what some advantages of using the MongoDB are. DAT-220 Fundamentals of Data Mining illustrated the process of analyzing data from databases. All three of these courses showed the power that databases hold for the Computer Science industry.

Throughout my time at SNHU it was very apparent that software security is one of the most important aspects of Computer Science. Two of my electives has roots in software security. CS-405 Secure Coding taught about secure coding process and best practices. I also learned about tools such as static analyzers that assist with identifying possible code weaknesses. CS-410 Software Reverse Engineering showed us how to reverse engineer and analyze code for security risks.

The artifacts selected for the ePortfolio showcase my skills in data structures and algorithms, software reverse engineering, and databases. These artifacts were not developed for the same projects, but the principals shown in each could be applied to any of the three projects to develop a complete software package.


### Informal Code Review

This [code review](https://youtu.be/aLvutOS_UfU) is base upon one of my first programming assingments at SNHU. The code review showcases early skillsets I developed as well as my understanding on how the assignment could be enhanced with my expanded knowledge thoughout my program.

A code review is a task which allows code created to be reread for quality purposes. This code review can take place in many variations from informal to formal, and by members of the developing team or third-party reviewers. Code reviews are an important part of the computer science profession because it allows for the code to be reviewed for structure, function, readability, and security concerns. Code reviews can be initiated due to the normal development process as well as when a concern is found during testing or product release.

Some of the best practices that should be utilized in code review is knowing the purpose of the review (security, structure, etc), reviewing small sections of code (less than 500 lines) at a time, verify defects are actually fixed, and use code analysis tools to assist in code reviews. These best practices will help ensure the code reviews are efficient and effective when they are performed. There is little point in performing a code review if the review misses key points. Two other best practices for code reviews is to make sure the code is annotated by the writer prior to the code review and ensuring you have enough time to review the code fully. The writer annotating the code prior to the review will ensue the reviewers know exactly what the intent of each code segment is and setting side enough time to review the code will allow the reviewer to be thorough to increase the accuracy of the review.


### Artifacts and Naratives

#### Software Design and Engineering

The artifact that I selected for this stage is the [Week 7 Final Project Summary and Reflection from CS-320: Software Testing, Automation & Quality Assurance](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1_-biJzVYMaGyCA2ARoNHRwh3VDpy5oQe/view?usp=sharing). This artifact was created in October 2019 during term 19EW1 and is an explanation of the testing process I created during this course, struggles I ran into while creating the test, and a reflection on why testing is important to software development. The Final Project Summary and Reflection artifact demonstrates the important aspect of testing and quality assurance when preparing a software product for launch.

The reason why I selected this artifact for this milestone is because software testing is an important part of the design and engineering of a new software product. This artifact illustrates how the testing plans are generally created prior to the software design to outline the requirements that need to be met by the software itself. In this artifact, the summary section illustrates my abilities in software development as it shows I understand the importance of testing a product prior to releasing it onto the market. This artifact was improved by providing an explanation for how important quality testing is when building a software product to ensure the project is coded securely and effectively, and it also explains when and how testing should take place during the development and design phase.

While I was improving this artifact, I learned there are many reasons why testing is important to software design and engineering. This testing creates the backbone for what we expect the product to do. Furthermore, testing is performed throughout development to ensure the product is meeting the expectations to prevent massive amounts of rewrites to correct issue along the way, and to ensure the product design can be readjusted if need be to ensure the product is created efficiently and effectively. The challenges I faced was deciding where in this artifact to make the changes so that the artifact still flows well without visibly noticing that there was a change made well after the artifact was created.


#### Algorithm and Data Structures

The artifact that I selected for this stage is the [Week 3 User Stories Final Project Checkpoint from CS-250: Software Development Lifecycle](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1ZBtxx5LKgka3BAoYstSvVpflvgI5mM-9/view?usp=sharing). This artifact was created in May 2018 during term 18EW5 and is an outline story provided by the user to allow for a new system to be developed and meet their needs. This artifact illustrates how crucial it is to obtain a story of what the customer is looking for their software to do in each section to ensure the algorithms and data structures developed during programming at correct and effective for the system’s overall operation.
  
The reason why I selected this artifact for this milestone is because the customer is the one who’s responsible for outlining the requirements for the system. This outline then gives the developer a basis for how the customer desires the system to act and lays the foundation for all the algorithms and structures used in the program. Without this information, the developer may create extra structures or even miss adding structures to meet the requirements. In the user stories, the value statement gives a short explanation of what is desired, and the acceptance criteria shows what the user is expecting for the system to perform. These stories showcase my knowledge about how to create a solid base for a software or system to be developed upon. This artifact had a small enhancement, which was the addition of a fourth user story to display a certain destination type. This enhancement will allow the end user to have additional functionality to the program. 
  
While I was improving this artifact, I learned there are multiple things people look for out of similar travel systems. I found by adding the enhancements to my artifact, I made the artifact create a large basis for the algorithms and structures that will be developed in the project this was created for. These enhancements will allow that project’s expanded capabilities to be more competitive to other similar systems. One challenge I faced was deciding on what enhancement I wanted to create for this document. There were many I could have chosen from, but I felt like the addition to this artifact was the most in line with the direction this project was already heading for its end goal.


#### Databases

The artifact that I selected for this stage is the [Week 7 Final Project Database Management Report from DAD-220: Introduction to SQL](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1PMps7bOlSdyB5jcG8K4ZhcJ9OkTdaXEX/view?usp=sharing). This artifact was created in April 2018 during term 18EW4 and is an outline story provided by the user to allow for a new system to be developed and meet their needs. This artifact shows my understanding of how to write SQL statements and queries. Additionally, this artifact demonstrates the benefits of using SQL for performing database functions.

The reason why I selected this artifact for the database milestone is because SQL is a commonly used database language and is highly sought after by employers. This artifact shows that I know how to use CRUD database functions to create and delete databases and tables. The artifact also shows that I know how to insert and remove data from the tables as well as reading and updating records of various tables. Finally, this artifact shows that I know how to link tables together using keys and how to join the tables in a query to return data that may be spread amongst multiple tables.

One thing that I learned during this enhancement is how universal SQL is in the programming world. This language allows for managing vary large databases that can have a great number of tables linked to each other. I also learned that SQL has possibly the highest number of jobs related to it compared to any other programming language. This information further emphasizes how important an understanding in SQL fundamentals and functionality is to a career in computer science.
